Can you discuss the time that you spent in Vietnam?
Well, okay, in 65, I went over to the advisor. I
served with the unit that was very poorly trained.
There were three of us Americans. There was an
officer. There was two non-commissioned
officers from America, and there was one
Australian officer. And we advised this infantry
battalion. We were in an area that was very
critical in defense of the Vietnamese army and of
the territory. We were in the Quang Ngai area, up in
the I Corps, up where Da Nang and Tam Kee and all
those places are. And that was in what you call a
tribe country of Vietnamese, Laos, and Cambodian
they met. So we conducted operations around it.
But remember that some of these Vietnamese
officers were sympathizers with the Viet Cong.
And so therefore, they wouldn't fight against
their own brother and cousin, just like any horse
else. uh it's pretty rough for us to live pretty
rough for us to live with those people and advise
them and then it was even rougher tough for us to be
with them because we'd never know when they're
putting us out and we'd be killed when we go out in
operation We had to live, sleep with them, and
everything. We had to follow their costumes. I
went to church with some of them. I went to Catholic
Mass with them on Sundays. I ate their food. I spoke
their language. I visited their villages. I
visited their relatives. And I look on in on
myself. So therefore, you know, I had it made in a
way, you know, and I was real slim in those days.
They were confused. They didn't know if I was a
Hawaiian or Filipino or what. And at one time I told
them I was a war orphan. And so they believed it. But
I stayed there and I attended the Bob Hope Prison
Show in 1965.
And then in 1966, I was wounded. I stepped on a
landmine. I was paralyzed on the way down. I was
declared never to walk again. And then that team
that I was with was overrun and completely
demolished. None of those people are alive now.
And I landed in the hospital in the Philippines. I
was in Clark Air Force Base. and I was paralyzed. I
was declared never to walk again. But I did it.
Thank God, you know, I was a paratrooper, and I was a
gun-holed airborne ranger and everything. And I
had faith, and I wanted to walk. So I did. After 10
months of struggling, kneeling and dragging
myself and getting up to a wall, I walked, and I
walked out of the hospital. And then I went back to
Fort Brand, North Carolina, and I went back to jump
status, and I made three faster jumps in one day. My
wife thought I was crazy. She was going to divorce
me and everything. She thought, you know, a bug
done hit my mind. She didn't think I was all there.
And I went with Special Forces, and I started
training with Special Forces. Then it was known as
the Green Berets. In 1962, the late President
Kennedy, of course, he observed the training of
the special forces. And Vietnam was developed and
developed. And of course, Korean classic just
came about in the Dominican Republic. And the
President thought that his advisors, as I
understand the story goes, that this was a sort of,
I don't know what they called that, counter
guerrilla warfare tactic, that we'd have to be
trained and you'd have to have special people in
this qualification
for training. counterinsurgency and
guerrilla warfare tactics and all. So then he
thought about the Special Forces. And so
President Kennedy said, hey look, what about
these Special Forces people? Let's
have them be identified as the Green Berets. And
that's Let's let the public know that we have
special people trained for the
counterinsurgency tactic. So then he authorized
us to wear the Green Beret. And then he said that the
Green Beret was a symbol of excellence, mark of
distinction, badge of courage, and fight for
freedom. So then we proved it to the world and to
every country that we were assigned to. that we are
instructors, we're teachers to their militia, to
their military. We're linguists, we're trained.
Someone said that we were a special breed of men.
Special forces are a special breed of men. We train
in our way to train others. to learn the meaning of
freedom. And we train them. We know weaponry. We
know operational intelligence, which includes
meteorology, fingerprinting, interpretation
of photography, interrogation for linguists. We
know medical training. Some of the medics are
trained almost like doctors. We're trained in
communications. We can communicate all around
the world in Morse codes and in engineering. We can
build, destroy. We're trained in
light and heavy weapons. We know every weapon in
the system. from the BB gun to the 105 holster. We
can operate any weapon, and we can not destroy, but
we can disassemble and assemble any weapon. And
some of these fellows can assemble them
blindfolded. That's amazing. So that's what a
special force can do. So, in 1968, then I went back
again with Special Forces and I was assigned to an
operation intelligence team to gather
intelligence information of the enemy. I was
trained I didn't have a weapon. I know all about all
the weapons that I just mentioned. I guess one
thing, it was hard to tell who the enemy was, wasn't
it? Well, in a way, for the other conventional
soldiers, remember the Special Forces are
unconventional. We live out there with them. The
conventional soldiers are these other soldiers
that stayed together. Being here in South Vietnam
and North Vietnam, all of them looked alike. Well,
that's where the intelligence came in. But you're
right. We didn't know. I had a long story. You hear
all kinds of stories. I had a couple of boys I went to
high school with served over there. And they said
that even the young children at times could be your
enemy. A little kid would come up and throw a hand in
the air. You never know who your enemy was. But they
were wonderful people. And they were confused as
we were. They were just more confused than we were.
Because they wanted liberty. They wanted
freedom. But yet their own brothers would not give
it to them. Their own their own cousins that were in
office. I'm sorry that that pencil went down. It's
not going down. Do you think the Soviets had a lot,
were behind a lot of it? I think that in some way they
had some influence, yeah. They did, just like they
have in Cuba. Just like they have in Central
America. Have you ever stopped to think And why
there's no Hispanic in Saskatoon Central
America? Is it an advisory? No, I never thought
about that. You know the news? They talk about Army
advisors, right? But they never talk about a
Hispanic in the Army being an advisor.
Why is it? Come to think about it.
How long did you stay in Vietnam? Well, the first
time, I stayed five months, almost six.
I was wounded. And the second time, in 1968, I
stayed almost four months. Is this the time when
you saved the other men? And the second time in
1968, yes. That was the time that I volunteered for
this mission.
May 2nd, 1968. And this was the time that you
eventually got the Congressional Medal of Honor,
is that right? Well, I was recommended for the
medal then. My commander didn't know the full
extent of the operation. And, of course, it was
so... Excuse me, it was so... The mission was so
classified that I didn't even know about that. I
didn't know the full extent because those men that
were asking for assistance, they were denied
assistance. That's how classified the mission
was. There was no helicopter going in there once
they let them in until after the operation. But
since I was in a different launch area, launch side
area,
I went up with my helicopter and I asked the forward
air controller, had been an assistant to us, an
assistant to us, and he said that, you know, that
we, that he was at loss because he couldn't support
any information. He couldn't support any
information because there was a secret operation
mission. However, he pinpointed an area where we
could get to, knowing that these people were in
desire of help, in desire of need of help. You know,
you just can't neglect your brother. And I'm glad
that that person acknowledged his location.
However, I can't find him. I don't know him. And
maybe he wants it that way. There's others that
have changed their name that don't want to be
located because of a sacred mission operation.
But I'm glad that I that I was able, it could have
been anyone else. A lot of people asked me, why did I
do it? You know, I couldn't, those people could
have done the same for me. I knew some of the men. In
fact, I just got a letter
from one of them. It was a pretty tough day. It was a
day that you can honestly say that you earned your
money. It was very sad.
One of the hardest things for a recipient of the
Medal of Honor is to know that you wear the medal and
you're able to talk about your experience. That's
when I wondered if it was really maybe too painful
to talk about, you know. Well, in a way it is, you
know, but in a way the public has to know. Because
the public has to know.
I tell you what, cut that off.
When were you first nominated or brought up to get
the Congressional Medal of Honor? Well, 1968.
after the action of May 2nd. And I didn't know. I
didn't have any knowledge of it. I was wounded. I
came through hospitals. I came through two
hospitals in Vietnam and Japan and the United
States. I received a nation's second highest
award. It was an interim award, but no one knew
about it.
My commander didn't even know that I was alive.
What is the second highest honor? The nation's
second highest award is Distinguished Service
Prize. And I wore that for seven years, for five
years.
And other people, other servicemen that remember
me, that served in Vietnam and that served with
special forces, they questioned me about the
Medal of Honor. I had no knowledge of it. And my
commander, who didn't think that I was still
alive, had recommended me for the Medal of Honor,
but had given me an interim award of the
Distinguished Service Corps.
He had made a recommendation for the Medal of
Honor. which I have documentation.
And that went on until 1973, 74. And then I found out
the full extent of the opera, of the
recommendation, everything. And I... It still
took how many years before you got it? Thirteen.
Thirteen years. That's a long time. It is. It was.
And there was a lot of frustration. But, you know,
in the military, the military is one big family.
And thank God you have so many people that help you,
you know, that take so much interest in you. I have
some of the greatest friends that I have met. My
wife and I and the kids.
that these people would have never rested until
they saw that justice was done. Would you have to
say that that's one of the proudest days of your
life, when the president gave you that medal?
Well, yes, because the president recognized me.
Or because the president, what he says in that tape
about the Vietnam veterans. Because that was
really the first praise that the Vietnam veterans
had ever gotten, really? I think, yes. From the
government or the public or anybody? But still, we
have to think that we have the POW and MIA and the
Agent Andre. I have spoken with the president
after he gave me the award and later. There's one of
the highlights of mine. career or the lifetime in
my
career. But I keep thinking my buddies, they're
still behind the bamboo curtain. And their
children, which I have letters, I receive letters
from. You work a lot with the MIA and POW cause? I do,
I do. I'm very deeply involved with it. I'm
religiously involved with it. and any of the
veterans that are wounded, I try to help as much as I
can. In fact, sometimes I even ask my wife if she
thinks that she's neglected by the children
because of my travel. What about the Agent Orange
controversy? Do you have any feelings about that?
Well, yes, I think I'm going to make them obey Agent
Orange. I flew a lot with those range hands, with
the foliation planes.
It was made, the veterans, the victims of the Asian
War were given an option of accepting 180 million
dollars. And to me, this was an insult. In fact, I
went to Houston to testify before the federal
judge because we took an oath to defend this
country, and this country didn't set a price tag.
Yet, they're setting a price tag for us after we
defend this country. They're saying, hey, look,
we're giving you 180 million bucks because we
think that, or you think that you was injured
Because there's defoliation.
These lawyers that have these people that are
injured in car accidents get millions of dollars.
That's right. Well, that goes back to what I said
earlier. Way back in the day. These people have too
much education to have enough common sense. I
mean, they are the ones that are enjoying freedom
at the expense of our body's life. So... By taking
our soldiers and defending these other
countries, it's keeping them from having the
people invade our country where we don't have to
see the war sites. We will never have this country,
ma'am. We will never have this country invaded.
You know why? No. Because this country has got too
much pride. This country has got too much
self-respect. Yet, these people... that are
upholding us to keep the self-respect in this
prime, they're lowering this country. And
they're the ones that are getting these other
people to fight against them. Those are the ones
that are doing it. The monetarys are strong.
You'd be surprised how many people, once they know
that you're an American, they would love to talk to
you, to touch you. Because you come from a free
world. This country is the freest of all. Yet those
people in the Pentagon, in those high-level
offices, they're the ones that are destroying us,
not us.
And that's why I have been to Congress. And I have
asked them to leave that jungle of
air-conditioned offices to come down here. and
see us they don't know how we live they make the
rules and regulations up there they don't know
what it is you know to go across the mud they don't
they have forgotten
but then who's going to suffer our children the
future leaders of this country and who's going to
make them suffer Our own leader.